---
title: "Variable Grid Traveltime Tomography for Near-surface Seismic Imaging"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2017-12-01-talk-AGU
venue: "American Geophysical Union"
date: 2017-12-01
location: "New Orleans, LA"
---

We present a new algorithm of traveltime tomography for imaging the subsurface with automated variable grids upon geological structures. The nonlinear traveltime tomography along with Tikhonov regularization using conjugate gradient method is a conventional method for near surface imaging. However, model regularization for any regular and even grids assumes uniform resolution. From geophysical point of view, long-wavelength and large scale structures can be reliably resolved, the details along geological boundaries are difficult to resolve. Therefore, we solve a traveltime tomography problem that automatically identifies large scale structures and aggregates grids within the structures for inversion. As a result, the number of velocity unknowns is reduced significantly, and inversion intends to resolve small-scale structures or the boundaries of large-scale structures. The approach is demonstrated by tests on both synthetic and field data. One synthetic model is a buried basalt model with one horizontal layer. Using the variable grid traveltime tomography, the resulted model is more accurate in top layer velocity, and basalt blocks, and leading to a less number of grids. The field data was collected in an oil field in China. The survey was performed in an area where the subsurface structures were predominantly layered. The data set includes 476 shots with a 10 meter spacing and 1735 receivers with a 10 meter spacing. The first-arrival traveltime of the seismogram is picked for tomography. The reciprocal errors of most shots are between 2ms and 6ms. The normal tomography results in fluctuations in layers and some artifacts in the velocity model. In comparison, the implementation of new method with proper threshold provides blocky model with resolved flat layer and less artifacts. Besides, the number of grids reduces from 205,656 to 4,930 and the inversion produces higher resolution due to less unknowns and relatively fine grids in small structures. The variable grid traveltime tomography provides an alternative imaging solution for blocky structures in the subsurface and builds a good starting model for waveform inversion and statics.

[More informaiton](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017AGUFMNS33A0026C/abstract)
